The Project Gutenberg eBook of Leaflet No. 312: Apples in Appealing Ways,
by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Leaflet No. 312: Apples in Appealing Ways

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: May 24, 2021 [eBook #65439]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Stephen Hutcheson, Lisa Corcoran and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LEAFLET NO. 312: APPLES IN
APPEALING WAYS ***




                       _APPLES in appealing ways_


                            _Leaflet No. 312
                    U. S. Department of Agriculture_

             _Bureau of Human Nutrition and Home Economics_




                       _APPLES in appealing ways_


Almost everyone enjoys apples. And there are so many ways to use apples
that a family need never tire of them.

This leaflet is designed to supplement the better-known apple recipes
given in many cook books. You will find here some new apple adventures
and some variations on favorite ways of using the fruit. Recipes calling
for applesauce and apple juice are included.

All recipes have been developed or adjusted by research methods, to
arrive at up-to-date, dependable directions.


Nutritionally speaking

Many families eat apples liberally, for apples regularly take top or
second rank among the country’s most widely used fruits.

Eaten in generous quantities, especially raw, apples can provide some
vitamin C. The food value, however, varies considerably, depending on
such factors as variety, storage conditions—temperature and length of
keeping—and finally the way the fruit is kept and served at home.

A small or medium-size apple makes a very pleasant low-calorie dessert
in many homes.


Choose your apples

To get the most in apple enjoyment, look for a variety that suits family
taste and the uses you have in mind.

Many varieties are good for all purposes—general cooking, baking whole,
eating raw. Tart, firm apples are generally best liked for cooking;
sweeter apples, for eating raw. (See table on pages 4 and 5 for
descriptions of 12 well-known varieties.)

Early summer apples are likely to be juicy, tart, and quick-cooking ...
especially good in applesauce and pies.

Don’t forget that apples that are tart and firm when picked in autumn
become less crisp and snappy if stored through the winter.

In some areas, windfalls and culls are sold at bargain rates. To make
sure you have a real bargain, stop, look, and consider how you will use
the fruit. Bruises and skin breaks mean waste, and apples damaged this
way are poor risks for home canning. Best uses for them are in jelly,
apple butter, or cider.

Skin russeting ordinarily does not affect apple quality.

If apples are to be bought in large quantity, it is better to buy a few
at first, to try out, to see whether they have the flavor and texture
you want.


Store for good keeping

Apples are noted for good keeping qualities, but it takes a little care
to hold them at their best in home storage.

_Short storage_ (a few days to 2 weeks): Keep firm apples in a cool
place, 60° to 70° F. Keep mellow-ripe apples in the refrigerator.

_Longer storage_ (up to several months): If you have plenty of cool- or
cold-storage space, where temperature remains the same and the air is
rather moist, you can probably save money by storing autumn-picked
apples in quantity at home.

Sort carefully to remove apples with bruises and skin breaks. Use these
promptly. Divide the sound apples into half-bushel lots and store at 32°
F. If you cannot provide this kind of storage, use your coldest storage
space, where there is no danger of the fruit freezing.

_Most recipes in this leaflet provide four servings; a few provide
more._




       KNOW YOUR APPLES: TWELVE OF THE WIDELY MARKETED VARIETIES


    VARIETY        SEASON          SIZE AND DESCRIPTION           USE

Baldwin          November    Medium to large. Partially red  Raw and
                 to May      to dull solid red. Juicy,       general
                             moderately tart, hard, crisp.   cooking.
Red Delicious    October to  Medium to large. Deep red, five Raw.
                 April       knobs on blossom end. Sweet,
                             firm, tender, fragrant.
Golden Delicious October to  Medium to large. Yellow. Sweet, Raw and
                 March       firm, crisp, tender.            general
                                                             cooking.
Grimes Golden    October to  Small to medium. Yellow with    Raw and
                 February    small dark specks. Moderately   general
                             juicy, slightly tart, firm,     cooking.
                             crisp, tender, fragrant.
Jonathan         October to  Small to medium. Deep red.      Raw and
                 February    Juicy, moderately tart, tender, general
                             crisp, fragrant.                cooking.
McIntosh         October to  Medium. Bright deep red striped Raw and
                 March       with carmine. Juicy, moderately general
                             tart, tender, crisp, fragrant.  cooking.
Northern Spy     October to  Large. Bright striped red.      Raw and
                 March       Juicy, moderately tart, firm,   general
                             crisp, tender, fragrant.        cooking.
Rome Beauty      November    Large. Yellow mingled with red. General
                 to May      Juicy, slightly tart, firm,     cooking,
                             rather crisp.                   baking whole.
Stayman          November    Medium to large. Dull striped   Raw, general
                 to April    red. Juicy, tart, firm, crisp.  cooking,
                                                             baking whole.
Winesap          January to  Small to medium. Deep bright    Raw, general
                 May         red with small scattered white  cooking,
                             dots. Juicy, slightly tart,     baking whole.
                             hard, crisp, fragrant.
Yellow Newtown   February    Medium. Yellow. Juicy,          Raw and
                 to June     moderately tart, hard, crisp.   general
                                                             cooking.
York Imperial    October to  Medium to large. Light or       Raw and
                 April       purplish red over yellow.       general
                             Lopsided shape, usually.        cooking.
                             Slightly tart, hard, crisp.




                       APPLES IN THE MAIN COURSE


Baked acorn squash with apples

To give a sharper flavor to the mild acorn....

  2 small acorn squashes
  ¼ cup brown sugar
  3 cups chopped apple
  Nutmeg
  ½ teaspoon salt
  2 tablespoons table fat

Cut squash in halves and scoop out seeds.

Place squash in a baking dish; fill centers with apple.

Pour a little water into the dish. Cover and bake at 350° F. (moderate
oven) 30 minutes, or until partly done.

Sprinkle with salt, sugar, and nutmeg, and dot with fat.

Bake uncovered about 45 minutes, or until the squash is soft.

Four servings.


Apple fritters

Fritters are special, and especially good with any lean meat—cold sliced
or hot ...

  1 cup sifted flour
  1 egg, beaten
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ½ cup milk
  1½ teaspoons baking powder
  1 tablespoon melted fat
  1 cup thinly sliced apples
  1 tablespoon sugar
  Fat for deep-fat frying

Sift together flour, salt, baking powder, and sugar.

Combine egg, milk, and fat. Add to the dry ingredients all at once,
stirring only enough to moisten.

Stir in the apples.

Drop by spoonfuls into hot fat (350°-375°F.) and cook until browned.

Serve with sirup or sprinkle with confectioners’ sugar.

Eight small fritters.


Apple stuffing

One way to bring together the ever-popular pork and apple team....

  ¼ cup diced salt pork
  ½ cup chopped onion
  ¼ cup chopped parsley
  5 medium-size tart apples, diced
  ½ cup sugar
  2 cups soft bread cubes

Cook salt pork in a fry pan until crisp, and remove from fat. Cook onion
and parsley in the fat for a few minutes.

Place apples in the pan, sprinkle with sugar. Cover and cook until
tender, then continue cooking uncovered a few minutes until apples are
candied.

Add salt pork and bread cubes; heat through.

Yield: 3 cups stuffing.


                    _Ways to use apple stuffing...._

Pile hot stuffing between two sections of spareribs, skewer them
together, and bake. Or use to stuff a boned shoulder of fresh pork.
One-half of this recipe will stuff four large pork chops, with enough
left over to cook on top of the chops.


Apple relish

Easy to make ... no cooking....

  1 cup finely chopped unpared apples
  1 cup finely shredded cabbage
  ½ cup finely chopped celery
  1 tablespoon chopped green pepper
  ⅓ cup sugar
  3 tablespoons vinegar
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ¼ teaspoon ginger
  ¼ teaspoon mustard
  Dash of cayenne pepper
  1 tablespoon chopped canned pimiento

Mix apples, cabbage, celery, and green pepper.

Combine sugar, vinegar, spices, and pimiento. Add to apples and
vegetables and mix lightly but thoroughly.

Yield: 2 cups.




                      APPLES IN SALAD AND DRESSING


When something firm and crisp is wanted in salad, along with fruity
flavor, apples are just the thing. They make likable combinations with
more salad foods than most people ever try. Salads in this section
include meat, cheese, fruits, and vegetables—even the onion, for onion
lovers.

Don’t let apples darken. Raw apple when cut often darkens from exposure
to air. Some nuts also make raw apple darken, especially if the fruit
has come in contact with iron in a knife blade or chopper.

So, when cutting apples for salad, protect them from darkening by mixing
the pieces with fruit juice—lemon, orange, grapefruit, or
pineapple—before adding other ingredients. Or, mix with salad dressing
at once, for a protective coating.

Some like it tart. To give a sharper tang to a salad, especially if
apples are mild in flavor, use a tart oil dressing, lemon juice, or a
sour cream dressing.


Jellied Waldorf salad

Mix diced tart apples, chopped celery, and nuts. Fold into a partially
thickened gelatin mixture. For 2 cups of the apple mixture, use 1
package of gelatin dessert powder and 2 cups of water. Chill until firm.


Fruit salad with onion

Core unpared apples and slice in thin cross sections. Arrange on salad
greens with orange slices and onion rings. Serve with a clear, tart oil
dressing.


Apple slaw

Moisten equal amounts of chopped apples and finely shredded cabbage with
sour-cream dressing.

_Variations_. If desired, season the dressing with a little horseradish,
or add coarsely ground peanut butter.


Main dish salads with apple

Mix 1 cup diced or sliced raw apple with ½ cup celery and 1 cup of any
of the following: Flaked tuna fish (7-oz. can); chopped cooked pork,
ham, veal, chicken, turkey; diced cheese. Moisten with tart french
dressing or mayonnaise and serve in lettuce cups. Four servings.

_For a jellied salad._ Fold the above ingredients—except the
dressing—into a partially thickened gelatin mixture made from a package
of lemon or lime gelatin dessert powder and 2 cups of water. Chill.
Serve with the dressing. Jellied this way, the recipe makes 6 servings.


Dessert salad

Sprinkle diced apples with lemon juice. Add chopped dates, raisins, or
grapes. Mix with marshmallows or cream cheese cut in small cubes.


Apple juice salad dressing

For fruit salads....

  ¼ cup sugar
  2 tablespoons cornstarch
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  Juice 1 lemon
  1 cup apple juice
  1 egg, well beaten
  1 3-ounce package cream cheese

Mix dry ingredients, add fruit juices, and blend. Cook over hot water 20
minutes, stirring frequently.

Slowly stir into egg. Return to heat and cook 5 minutes, stirring
constantly. Cool slightly.

Mash cream cheese with fork; beat into cooked mixture. Chill.

Yield: 1 cup.




                            APPLES IN BREAD


Applesauce bran muffins

Softer than most bran muffins....

  1¼ cups sifted flour
  3 teaspoons baking powder
  ½ teaspoon salt
  2 tablespoons sugar
  1 cup bran
  1 egg, beaten
  ⅓ cup milk
  ⅔ cup applesauce
  ¼ cup melted fat

Sift together flour, baking power, salt, and sugar. Mix in bran.

Combine egg, milk, applesauce, and fat. Add to the dry ingredients all
at once, stirring only enough to moisten.

Fill greased muffin pans two-thirds full. Bake at 400° F. (hot oven)
about 20 minutes.

Makes about 12 medium-size muffins.

Applesauce whole-wheat muffins. Use same recipe, replacing bran with 1
cup whole-wheat flour and using 1 cup applesauce. Do not try to sift
this flour.

For a different flavor. Add 1 teaspoon grated orange rind to the milk.


Apple griddlecakes

Brighten any breakfast or supper....

  1½ cups sifted flour
  1½ teaspoons baking powder
  ¾ teaspoon salt
  1 tablespoon sugar
  1 egg, beaten
  1 cup milk
  2 tablespoons melted fat
  2 cups very finely chopped apples

Sift dry ingredients together.

Combine the egg, milk, and fat. Add gradually to the dry ingredients;
stir only until batter is smooth. Fold in apples.

Drop by spoonfuls onto a hot greased griddle. Cook slowly until the
surface is covered with bubbles, turn, and cook until the bottom is
well-browned.

Makes about 18 medium-size griddlecakes.




                           APPLES IN COOKIES


A piece of cut apple in the cookie jar is a familiar device to keep
cookies from drying out quickly. These applesauce cookies have the
moisture and fruit flavor built in.


Applesauce drop cookies

  ½ cup fat
  1 cup sugar
  1 egg
  1¾ cups sifted flour
  ½ teaspoon baking powder
  1 teaspoon soda
  ½ teaspoon salt
  1 teaspoon cinnamon
  ½ teaspoon cloves
  ½ teaspoon nutmeg
  ½ cup seedless raisins
  1 cup quick-cooking rolled oats
  1 cup applesauce

Cream together fat and sugar; stir in the egg.

Sift together flour, baking powder, soda, salt, cinnamon, cloves,
nutmeg. Mix in raisins and rolled oats. Add to creamed mixture in three
portions alternately with applesauce in two portions. Beat well.

Drop dough by teaspoonfuls onto greased baking sheets. Bake at 375° F.
(moderate oven) about 15 minutes.

Makes about 3 dozen cookies.


Applesauce refrigerator cookies

  ¾ cup fat
  1 cup sugar
  1 egg
  2½ cups sifted flour
  ½ teaspoon soda
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  ½ teaspoon cinnamon
  ¼ teaspoon cloves
  ½ cup chopped nuts
  ½ cup applesauce

Cream together fat and sugar; stir in the egg.

Sift together flour, soda, salt, cinnamon, and cloves. Mix in nuts. Add
to creamed mixture in three portions alternately with the applesauce in
two portions.

Form into rolls; wrap in waxed paper and chill in refrigerator.

Slice thinly. Bake on greased baking sheets at 375° F. (moderate oven)
10 to 15 minutes.

Makes about 5 dozen cookies.


Chocolate applesauce bars

  2 squares (2 ounces) unsweetened chocolate
  ½ cup fat
  1 cup sugar
  2 eggs, slightly beaten
  1 cup applesauce
  1¼ cups sifted flour
  ½ teaspoon baking powder
  ½ teaspoon soda
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ¼ teaspoon cloves
  ¼ teaspoon nutmeg
  ½ teaspoon cinnamon
  ½ cup chopped nut meats

Melt chocolate and fat together over hot water. Cool slightly.

Blend in sugar, eggs, and applesauce.

Sift together the flour, baking powder, soda, salt, and spices. Add to
first mixture.

Stir in the nut meats.

Spread the batter in two greased 8-inch square pans. Bake at 350° F.
(moderate oven) 30 to 40 minutes.

Cool in pan; then cut into 3 dozen small bars.




                           APPLES IN DESSERTS


When it comes to desserts, apples are in their glory, and the cook can
always find a way to prepare them that fits right in with her plans. She
can make desserts with apples raw or cooked, applesauce, juice, or
canned slices. Apple desserts can be hot or cold ... quick to fix, or
time-consuming but well worth it.

Recipes given here provide examples of the many ways of topping off the
meal with apples.


Baked apples

Core apples without cutting through the blossom end. Pare apples
one-third of the way down.

Place apples in a baking dish. Sprinkle the holes lightly with salt, and
add 1 tablespoon sugar to each apple. Top with table fat and sprinkle
sugar over pared portion of apples.

Pour enough water in bottom of dish to keep apples from sticking.

Bake uncovered at 400° F. (hot oven) about 1 hour, or until apples are
tender.


                             _For variety_

1. Fill the apples with chopped fresh cranberries and bake.

2. Fill centers with crushed pineapple. After baking, top apples with
marshmallows and return to oven for a few minutes.

3. Serve with a topping of cream cheese softened with cream and beaten
until fluffy.


Apple-cheese dessert

  5 cups apple slices (pared)
  1 tablespoon lemon juice
  ¾ cup sugar
  ¼ teaspoon cinnamon
  ½ cup sifted flour
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  ¼ cup table fat
  ⅔ cup grated cheese

Fill pie pan or shallow baking dish with apples; sprinkle with lemon
juice and ¼ cup of the sugar.

Mix cinnamon, flour, salt, and the other ½ cup sugar. Cut in fat until
mixture is granular. Stir in cheese. Spread over apples.

Bake at 350° F. (moderate oven) until apples are tender—about 40
minutes.

Cool before cutting to serve.

Serve with plain cream or ice cream, if desired.

Six servings.


Dessert apple slices

Slice pared apple quarters. Put slices into pan and add enough water to
half cover apples. Add a few grains of salt and 2 to 4 tablespoons of
sugar for each apple used. Put the cover on and cook gently until apples
are tender—20 to 30 minutes. Serve chilled, plain or with cream. Or,
bake some of the drained slices in custard (p. 15).


Apple pie

  6 medium-size tart apples, quartered
  ¾ to 1 cup sugar
  1 teaspoon cinnamon
  1 teaspoon salt
  2 tablespoons table fat
  Pastry for 9-inch pie

Pare, core, and slice the apples. Line a piepan with pastry. Place a
layer of apples over the bottom; sprinkle with a mixture of the sugar,
cinnamon, and salt. Dot with fat. Repeat until all ingredients are used.

Cover with pastry that has a few slits in the center so steam can
escape; seal edges.

Bake at 425° F. (hot oven) 40 to 50 minutes, or until apples are tender
and crust is well-browned.

French apple pie. Mix 1 cup seedless raisins with the apples and reduce
the sugar to ½ cup. To frost, mix ½ cup confectioners’ sugar with 2
teaspoons water and spread over top crust of cooled pie.


Apple tapioca

  2 medium-size apples
  ½ cup sugar
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  2 cups water
  2 tablespoons quick-cooking tapioca
  Nutmeg, if desired

Pare and slice apples.

Add sugar and salt to the water; put over heat and stir until sugar is
dissolved.

Add apples and cover the pan. Cook slowly until apples are just
tender—about 15 minutes.

Carefully stir in tapioca, and continue cooking a few minutes until
tapioca is transparent.

Sprinkle with nutmeg and serve with plain or whipped cream.

Red apple tapioca. Add ¼ cup red cinnamon candies to water and stir
until dissolved before adding apples. Omit nutmeg.

Four servings.


Apple custard

  1 cup dessert apple slices (p. 13) or canned apple slices, drained
  3 tablespoons sugar
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  2 eggs, beaten
  1½ cups hot milk
  Nutmeg

Arrange apples in bottom of four custard cups. Combine sugar, salt, and
eggs. Add milk slowly. Pour over apples, sprinkle with nutmeg. Set cups
in a pan of hot water.

Bake at 325° F. (slow oven) until the custard is set—30 to 40 minutes.

Four servings.


Applesauce puff

  4 slices bread or plain cake
  2 tablespoons butter or margarine
  1½ cups applesauce
  1 teaspoon cinnamon
  ⅓ cup brown sugar
  1 egg
  1 cup milk
  ¼ teaspoon salt

Spread bread or cake slices with butter or margarine, and arrange in the
bottom of a greased baking dish.

Cover with applesauce; sprinkle with cinnamon and about half the sugar.

Beat together egg, milk, salt, and rest of sugar. Omit sugar in this
mixture if cake is used. Pour over mixture in baking dish.

Set in pan of hot water and bake at 350° F. (moderate oven) about 40
minutes.

Four servings.


Frozen applesauce cream

  1 cup applesauce
  1 cup thin cream
  ⅓ cup sugar
  ¼ cup lemon juice

Combine ingredients, stirring until sugar is dissolved.

Pour into freezing tray and freeze at the coldest refrigerator
temperature until firm.

Turn into chilled bowl and beat smooth. Return quickly to tray; freeze.

Four servings.


Applesauce Bavarian cream

  1 tablespoon gelatin
  ¼ cup cold water
  ¾ cup applesauce
  2 tablespoons lemon juice
  ½ teaspoon grated lemon rind
  ¼ cup sugar
  ¼ teaspoon each cinnamon, ginger, nutmeg
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  1 egg white
  ½ cup heavy cream, whipped
  ½ cup crushed ginger snaps

Sprinkle gelatin on water and soak for a few minutes.

Heat applesauce, lemon juice, and lemon rind with half the sugar.

Dissolve gelatin in hot applesauce. Add spices. Chill until partly set.

Add salt to egg white and beat until stiff. Add rest of sugar slowly,
beating until glossy.

Fold egg white mixture, cream, and half of the crumbs into gelatin
mixture. Pour into mold.

Chill until firm.

Before serving, sprinkle with rest of the crumbs.

Four servings.


Applesauce gelatin dessert

  3 cups applesauce
  ½ cup (1 box) gelatin dessert powder (any fruit flavor)
  32 small vanilla wafers
  ½ cup heavy cream
  1 tablespoon sugar

Heat applesauce slowly, stirring frequently. Stir dessert powder into
hot applesauce; stir until dissolved. Chill until partly set.

Place a layer of wafers in bottom of 8-inch square pan.

Pour in applesauce mixture, and cover with another layer of wafers.

Chill until firm.

Top with sweetened whipped cream just before serving.

Nine servings.


Applesauce chiffon pie

  1 tablespoon gelatin
  ¼ cup cold water
  3 eggs, separated
  1½ cups applesauce
  ⅛ teaspoon ginger
  ¼ teaspoon cinnamon
  ½ cup milk
  1 tablespoon lemon juice
  ½ teaspoon grated lemon rind
  ½ cup sugar
  ¼ teaspoon salt
  9-inch baked pastry shell, or graham cracker shell
  Nutmeg if desired

Sprinkle gelatin on water; soak a few minutes.

Beat egg yolks slightly, and add the applesauce, ginger, cinnamon, milk,
lemon juice and rind, and half the sugar.

Cook over boiling water, stirring constantly, 20 to 25 minutes.

Add gelatin to the hot mixture; stir until dissolved. Cool until thick
but not set.

Add salt to egg whites and beat until stiff. Add rest of sugar slowly,
beating constantly. Blend with the thickened gelatin mixture.

Pour into the shell and sprinkle with nutmeg, if desired. Chill until
firm.


Applesauce

Wash, quarter, and core apples.

Cook until soft with a small amount of water in a covered pan. Put
apples through a sieve or food press. Add a few grains of salt, and
sweeten to taste while still hot.

Quick applesauce. Pare quartered and cored apples. Cook as above. When
apples are tender, crush pieces with a potato masher or stir until
smooth. Add salt and sweeten as above.

For variety. Sweeten the sauce with brown sugar or honey. Or, cook a few
whole cloves or a piece of stick cinnamon or a few raisins with the
apples. Remove cinnamon before serving.

If the apples are very mild, cook 1 to 2 teaspoons of lemon juice with
them.


Apple juice cake

  ½ cup fat
  ½ teaspoon vanilla
  1 cup sugar
  2 eggs
  2 cups sifted cake flour
  1 teaspoon baking powder
  ½ teaspoon soda
  ½ teaspoon salt
  ½ teaspoon cinnamon
  ¼ teaspoon cloves
  ½ teaspoon nutmeg
  ¾ cup apple juice

Cream fat, vanilla, and sugar together until light and fluffy. Add the
eggs one at a time, beating each one in well.

Sift together flour, baking powder, soda, salt, cinnamon, cloves, and
nutmeg.

Add to creamed mixture in three portions alternately with apple juice in
two portions.

Turn batter into two greased 8-inch round layer pans.

Bake at 375° F. (moderate oven) 25 to 30 minutes.

_Variation._ Add 1 cup of raisins to the batter.


Fluffy apple juice frosting

  1 cup sugar
  ½ cup apple juice
  Pinch of salt
  1 tablespoon lemon juice
  2 egg whites, stiffly beaten

Mix sugar, apple juice, salt, and lemon juice. Cook until the sirup
forms a soft ball (234° to 240° F.) when a little of it is dropped into
a cup of very cold water.

Pour very slowly over stiffly beaten egg whites, beating constantly.
Continue beating until mixture stands in soft peaks.

Spread between layers and over top and sides of cake.

_Variations._ When frosting is ready to spread, stir in ½ cup chopped
pecans or hazelnuts, or shredded almonds.

For a more festive cake, sprinkle ¼ cup pink-tinted shredded coconut
over the top after frosting is spread.




                              APPLE SNACKS


As a snack, or a fruity appetizer for tea, use apple slices spread with
a topping. Applewiches they are sometimes called, especially when a
second apple slice is placed over the topping.

To prepare the slices, core the apple and cut thick rounds, leaving the
colorful peel on. Toppings include—

Soft sharp cheese ... cream cheese with strawberry jam or chopped nuts
... peanut butter and mayonnaise ... sliced ham, chicken, or turkey, or
any of these meats ground and mixed with mayonnaise.




                            INDEX TO RECIPES


                                  Page
  Apples in the main course                                            6
      Baked acorn squash with apples                                   6
      Apple fritters                                                   6
      Apple stuffing                                                   7
      Apple relish                                                     7
  Apples in salad and dressing                                         8
      Jellied Waldorf salad                                            8
      Fruit salad with onion                                           8
      Apple slaw                                                       8
      Main dish salads with apple                                      9
      Dessert salad                                                    9
      Apple juice salad dressing                                       9
  Apples in bread                                                     10
      Applesauce bran muffins                                         10
      Applesauce whole-wheat muffins                                  10
      Apple griddlecakes                                              10
  Apples in cookies                                                   11
      Applesauce drop cookies                                         11
      Applesauce refrigerator cookies                                 11
      Chocolate applesauce bars                                       12
  Apples in desserts                                                  12
      Baked apples                                                    12
      Apple-cheese dessert                                            13
      Dessert apple slices                                            13
      Apple pie                                                       14
      French apple pie                                                14
      Apple tapioca                                                   14
      Red apple tapioca                                               14
      Apple custard                                                   15
      Applesauce puff                                                 15
      Frozen applesauce cream                                         15
      Applesauce Bavarian cream                                       16
      Applesauce gelatin dessert                                      16
      Applesauce chiffon pie                                          17
      Applesauce                                                      17
      Apple juice cake                                                18
      Fluffy apple juice frosting                                     18
  Apple snacks                                                        19


              BUREAU OF HUMAN NUTRITION AND HOME ECONOMICS
                  Agricultural Research Administration
            U. S. Department of Agriculture. September 1951
                      Prepared by Mary T. Swickard

This leaflet supersedes the unnumbered publication, Apple Recipes.

                 U. S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1951


    For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, Government Printing
                                 Office
                  Washington 25, D. C.—Price 10 cents




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LEAFLET NO. 312: APPLES IN APPEALING
WAYS ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
